# How to make e2e testing in Android

* Status: proposed
* Deciders: @rosa.palli @carolina.acosta @alejandro.batanero
* Date: 2023-09-22

Technical Story: BLOPUP-268 BLOPUP-269

## Context and Problem Statement

We need to add end to end test to the app to try to cover all the possible scenarios and avoid bugs in the future.
We don't have anything in place yet, so we need to decide how to do it.
Should we use Espresso or Maestro? An emulator or a cloud? How to run it in the CI?

## Decision Drivers

* Stability/Flakiness
* Easy to use
* Price
* CI integration
* Speed

## Considered Options

We are going to use our actual CI platform (Github & Github actions) and are considering the following options:

### Espresso + emulator
* We already have an old Espresso test suite that we can use as a starting point, but it's not very stable.
* Espresso is the default Android testing framework, so it's easy to find documentation and examples.
* We can run it in the CI using an emulator, but it's slow and flaky.
* We can run it locally using an emulator or a real device.
* Setting up the emulator in the CI is not easy and it's not very stable.

### Maestro + emulator
* Maestro is a new framework that appeared in the Thoughworks tech radar and it's more stable than Espresso.
* It's easy to use and it's well documented.
* We can run it in the CI using an emulator, but it's slow and flaky.
* We can run it locally using an emulator or a real device.
* Maestro it's very easy to write and read, so it's easy to maintain.
* Maestro manage very well the times and animations, so no need to add sleeps or waits.
* Setting up the emulator in the CI is not easy and it's not very stable.
* We need to add a new dependency to the project.
* We need to add a new dependency to the CI.

### Maestro + cloud
* Maestro is a new framework that appeared in the Thoughworks tech radar and it's more stable than Espresso.
* It's easy to use and it's well documented.
* We can run it in the CI using a cloud, so it's faster and more stable.
* We can run it locally using an emulator or a real device.
* Maestro it's very easy to write and read, so it's easy to maintain.
* Maestro manage very well the times and animations, so no need to add sleeps or waits.
* It's not free, so we need to pay for it.
* We need to add a new dependency to the project.
* We need to add a new dependency to the CI.


## Decision Outcome

Chosen option: "Maestro + cloud", because we don't depend on the CI emulator that it's very unstable and flaky. 
This flow is faster and more stable, so we can run it more often and have more confidence in the results.
We decided to use Maestro because writing tests is very easy and it's very stable. It also provide
a tool called maestro studio that makes it even easier.

### Positive Consequences

* The pipeline configuration it's very simple.
* The tests are stable and fast.

### Negative Consequences

* Maestro cloud is not free, so we need to pay for it. The free tier is enough for us, but we need to be careful.
It allow us to execute 100 flows per month, so we need to be careful with the number of tests that we add.
* We depend on a third party tool, so if they have a problem we can't run the tests.
* We need to add a new dependency to the project.
* We need to add a new dependency to work locally.

## Links <!-- optional -->

* [Maestro](https://maestro.mobile.dev/)
